Forming the Right Personality
Objectives
Discuss how product managers can train themselves to adapt their personality to the job
Summarize tips to learn how to share the "right" personality
Variation and diversity
There is no magic formula for hiring a product manager. Variation and diversity are critical in product management to provide multiple perspectives. Product managers should also never assume that their customers have only one view of a product, so it is beneficial to have them come from different backgrounds. For this reason, product managers should learn how to best utilize their skills and talents. For example, if you have a technical background in software, you probably have a good understanding of the development process, and if you have worked in software, you can use that to your advantage. The other side of the coin is personality.

Different perspective
Every product manager brings a different perspective and personality to the job, and you should use this to improve your team and the project's performance. If you have an outgoing person, you can use them to socialize, communicate, negotiate, and network. In some cases, this is easy, for others it can mean work. You may need to train yourself to adapt these personality traits to the job. Others may be more introverted and enjoy immersing themselves in data. They are the type of product managers who excel at research, analysis, and interpretation of data. Product managers are often entrepreneurs.

Good fit for the type of company
There is no right or wrong type of person to be a product manager, there are only good fits for the type of company and product. If you have a passion and a vision, you can use your personality to be successful. When you train your personality for the job, you find out what areas of product management you can excel in. If you want to work for a company that is aware of the issues you care about and your personality is best suited to drive the mission, you might find it rewarding to work for them. If you are a leader, use this as an opportunity to bring teams together that might not otherwise work together.

Leadership
You may have the kind of personality that makes people want to follow your lead. This can be of great value to the product and the company. You may need to spend time learning about leadership, but you should think about how to adapt it to your job. Product managers are often curious and want to develop the best product to fill a gap. Some are focused on growth and have the ability to think beyond the launch. Others show loyalty and take the brand and product very personally.

People known for introspection are able to think deeply about and understand the customer experience. You may want to know your strengths and weaknesses and practice applying your personality to your strengths, but also develop the weaknesses. If you have a hard time leading people or public speaking, develop those areas, and find ways to showcase your other strengths.

Beliefs and values
Finally, your work should always be guided by your beliefs and values. You should believe in the mission and vision of the company. The products should reflect your beliefs and you should believe in the products you manage.

The use of your personality in product management is situational and you should be consistent in your approach. You should know when the right time is to bring out the best of your personality. If the situation calls for strong leadership, then this is the best time to capitalize on it. Maybe the company has an idea of what it wants to do but lacks the enthusiasm or entrepreneurial skills to put it into action.

Lab: The Role of a Product Manager
Estimated time needed: 30 minutes

Overview
In this lab, you will review a scenario with the goal of defining the role of a product manager in IT Industrial Services and developing a framework for product management. You will also build a list of skills essential to a product owner's success.

Objectives
After completing this lab, you will be able to:

Define the role of a product manager in IT Industrial Services
Develop a framework for product management in IT Industrial Services
Build a list of skills essential to product owner's success
Prerequisites
For this lab, you have been provided with a Template/Answer sheet. The documents are in Microsoft Word format. It is suggested that you have either Word installed on your computer or have a Microsoft 365 online account. You may also use other word processing software like Google Docs that allow you to open Word documents.
If you want to sign up for Microsoft Office 365 online and need help with the steps to sign up, click here.
If you are new to Microsoft Word, click here.
Scenario: Launch of a new mobile app
IT Industrial Services has just completed its fifth year of operation and has grown to 300 employees. They began by offering universities the services to manage their learning platforms. They partnered with a company called Learning, Inc., which provides the platform.

Lately, your CEO has been talking about growth and positioning the company in the market to offer more than just platform management. She has also heard that some of her customers have moved to another company that focuses on the college scale. She feels they must offer more customized services for universities and community colleges.

Currently, the company does not have a product manager and is not specifically involved in product management. The CEO believes that the company can only grow if it invests in true product management and is ready to hire three product managers. As VP of Strategy, you have the opportunity to set up the product management department.

Exercise
Define the role of a product manager in IT Industrial Services, develop a framework for product management, and build a list of skills essential to a product owner's success.

Keeping the CTRL key pressed, click here to download the Answer sheet to record your answers.
Note: On Mac systems, keep the COMMAND key pressed instead of the CTRL key.

Open the Answer Sheet that you downloaded.

Review the scenario and define an ideal product manager for IT Industrial Services based on the following criteria:

Skills
Experience
Understanding of the development process
Goals
Vision about the product management organization work
Criteria for success
Identify the benefits of having a product manager in the organization by reflecting on the following questions:
How does this favor them against the competition?
How does it improve their opportunity for growth?
How does it position them in the market?


Product Management Lifecycle Key Deliverables
Overview
As you make your way through the work of product management, you will achieve important results at each stage of the lifecycle. Although planning is important, product managers need to focus on the lifecycle aspects.

Objectives
Illustrate key deliverables during each step of the product management lifecycle
The Conceive phase
In the Conceive phase, the product manager is responsible for a portfolio of analyzes that show the product is worth developing. Internal and external analysis should be conducted. For example, an analysis of SWOT should be conducted to show the company's ability to produce the product and some of the obstacles that may stand in its way. They should demonstrate a thorough understanding of the market and the competition. An analysis should be prepared that documents the various options available to product managers to meet the need.

After product managers have developed options, they decide where to focus and create a concept. This can be done by using a prioritization matrix to look at and evaluate the options. Next, they seek approval for the concept and begin designing a product. The product manager may decide to go a step further and create a prototype or model for others to see. 3D printing technology makes this easy and inexpensive to do. The product manager also designs a marketing and implementation strategy. You may also need to get corporate approval but expect resistance from at least one person. If you wait for consensus, you may never get to the planning stage.

The Plan phase
The Plan phase produces more concrete results. This phase builds on the conceptual phase and fleshes out the concepts you have created. You should expect to build a team, create a project plan, a business case, and an implementation plan, and a more sophisticated marketing strategy. Perhaps one of the most important deliverables at this stage is the product roadmap. This document details how the product will move through its lifecycle and sets expectations for how the product will perform and handle demand. Finally, a launch strategy is developed. This will explain how the public will be made aware of the product, and will include other considerations such as pilot testing, demonstrations, and beta testing.

The Develop phase
In the Develop phase, product development focuses on building the product and refining the design. Details are added to the strategies and a specific implementation plan is created. Operations are involved and a plan is developed to pass on the product after launch. Note that further refinement of the previous deliverables is necessary. All documentation must be alive in the sense that it will be updated as more information about customer needs and the market is gathered and the product takes shape in prototype form. Quality assurance is turned on to ensure the integrity of the verification process.

All products must meet the customer's requirements and specifications. Therefore, testing should be performed regularly during this phase. Usability should be tested so that you not only verify the specifications, but also whether the customer can get value from the product. Then the launch plan is created, which includes items such as pricing, sales plans, advertising, and sales promotions. A support plan is developed so that the customer support team takes some of the responsibility as they face the customers. Training materials are also created.

The Qualify phase
Next is the Qualify phase, where beta testing happens and the product is offered to the market for the first time. This all happens before the official launch. It is an opportunity to get valuable feedback and correct everything before the full-scale launch. Before the launch, the company makes the decision whether to hold off or push ahead with the launch. Despite all the work that has gone into the product up to this point, there may be obstacles that need to be addressed or the company will find that it needs to abandon the project.

The Launch phase
The Launch phase is where the final launch plan is developed. Preparations for a successful launch are very involved. During this phase, risks and contingencies must be researched and mitigation strategies developed. Marketing materials are created and prepared for deployment.

The Deliver phase
The product moves into the Deliver phase, where you hand over the product to the business. This phase is about learning and developing the product. You may need to make adjustments to the product or reposition based on information. It is constantly in flux and changing.

The Retire phase
Finally, there is the Retire phase. An end-of-life plan is created to determine how support will end, contracts will be terminated, and what will happen to the product as it becomes obsolete.